.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii foo.1
.\"
.TH HASHDB_MANAGER 1 "SEP 2013" "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
hashdb_manager \- Create and manage hash databases.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B hashdb_manager <command>
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B hashdb_manager
provides commands for creating and managing hash databases
and for providing a hash database query service over a socket connection.
.SH COPY
This command is useful for importing a DFXML file into a hash database
or copying hashes from one hash database to another.

.IP "--copy [<hashdb tuning parameter>]+ [-r <repository name>] <input> <hashdb>"

.SH REMOVE
This command is useful for removing hashes defined in a DFXML file
or a hash database from another hash database.

.IP "--remove [-r <repository name>] <input> <hashdb>"

.SH MERGE
This command is useful for merging the contents of two hash databases
into a third hash database.

.IP "--merge [<hashdb tuning parameter>]+ <hashdb input 1> <hashdb input 2> <hashdb output>"

.SH REBUILD_BLOOM
This command is useful for rebuilding the bloom filter of a hash database
to a different size in order to improve lookup performance.

.IP "--rebuild_bloom [<bloom filter tuning parameter>]+ <hashdb>"

.SH EXPORT
This command is useful for exporting the hashes in a hash database
out to a DFXML file.

.IP "--export <hashdb> <DFXML file>"

.SH INFO
This command is useful for obtaining information about a hash database.

.IP "--info <hashdb>"

.SH SERVER
This command is useful for providing server query lookup service access
to a hash database.

.IP "--server <hashdb>"

.SH HISTORY
.BR "hashdb_manager" 
was released into the public domain by Bruce Allen in 2013.
.SH AUTHOR
Bruce Allen <bdallen@nps.edu>
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Report bugs to bdallen@nps.edu
.SH COPYRIGHT
.BR "hashdb_manager" 
code is provided with the following notice:
The software provided here is released by the Naval Postgraduate School,
an agency of the U.S. Department of Navy. The software bears no warranty,
either expressed or implied. NPS does not assume legal liability nor
responsibility for a User's use of the software or the results of such use.

Please note that within the United States, copyright protection,
under Section 105 of the United States Code, Title 17, is not available
for any work of the United States Government and/or for any works
created by United States Government employees. 

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR "hashdb" 
wiki at https://github.com/simsong/hashdb/wiki.
Also, please see The User Guide for the hashdb Tools.

