.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii foo.1
.\"
.TH HASHDB_CHECKER 1 "SEP 2013" "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
hashdb_checker \- Provide hash lookup services.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B hashdb_checker <command>
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B hashdb_checker
provides commands that may be used for looking up information
in a hash database.
The hash database may be resident at a file path
or it may be accessed through a server service available at a socket.
.SH QUERY_HASH
This command is useful for looking up hash values that are in a
DFXML file.

.IP "--query_hash [query parameter>]+ <dfxml input>"

.SH QUERY_SOURCE
This command is useful for looking up hash source information that is in an
.B identified_blocks.txt
input file.

.IP "--query_hashdb_info [query parameter>]+"

.SH HISTORY
.BR "hashdb_checker" 
was released into the public domain by Bruce Allen in 2013.
.SH AUTHOR
Bruce Allen <bdallen@nps.edu>
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Report bugs to bdallen@nps.edu
.SH COPYRIGHT
.BR "hashdb_checker" 
code is provided with the following notice:
The software provided here is released by the Naval Postgraduate School,
an agency of the U.S. Department of Navy. The software bears no warranty,
either expressed or implied. NPS does not assume legal liability nor
responsibility for a User's use of the software or the results of such use.

Please note that within the United States, copyright protection,
under Section 105 of the United States Code, Title 17, is not available
for any work of the United States Government and/or for any works
created by United States Government employees. 

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR "hashdb" 
wiki at https://github.com/simsong/hashdb/wiki.
Also, please see The User Guide for the hashdb Tools.

