.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii foo.1
.\"
.TH HASHDB 1 "MAR 2014" "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
hashdb \- Create and manage block hash databases.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B hashdb <command>
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B hashdb
provides commands for creating and managing hash databases.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP "-q, --quiet"
quiet mode
.IP "-f, --flags=flags"
set B-Tree flags to manage runtime performance
.IP "-p, --hash_block_size=<hash block size>"
<hash block size>, in bytes, used to generate hashes (default 4096)
.IP "-m, --max_duplicates=<maximum>"
<maximum> number of hash duplicates allowed, or 0 for no limit
(default 0)

.SH BLOOM FILTER OPTIONS
.IP "--bloom <state>"
set bloom filter <state> to enabled | disabled (default enabled)
.IP "--bloom_n <n>"
expected total number <n> of unique hashes (default 1)
.IP "--bloom_kM <k:M>"
number of hash functions <k> and bits per hash <M> (default <k>=28
and <M>=3 or <M>=value calculated from value in --bloom_n)

.SH COMMANDS

.IP "create [options]+ <hashdb>"
Create a new hash database.

.IP "import [-r <repository name>] <hashdb> <DFXML file>"
Import hashes from file <DFXML file> into hash database <hashdb>.

.IP "export <hashdb> <DFXML file>"
Export hashes from the <hashdb> to a <DFXML file>.

.IP "add <source hashdb> <destination hashdb>"
Copy hashes from the <source hashdb> to the <destination hashdb>.

.IP "add_multiple <source hashdb 1> <source hashdb 2> <destination hashdb>"
Perform a union of <source hashdb 1> and <source hashdb 2> into
the <destination hashdb>.

.IP "add_repository <source hashdb> <destination hashdb> <repository name>"
Copy hashes from <source hashdb> to <destination hashdb>
when the <repository name> matches.

.IP "intersect <source hashdb 1> <source hashdb 2> <destination hashdb>"
Copy hashes that are common to both <source hashdb 1> and
<source hashdb 2> into <destination hashdb>.
Hashes and their sources must match.

.IP "intersect_hash <source hashdb 1> <source hashdb 2> <destination hashdb>"
Copy hashes that are common to both <source hashdb 1> and
<source hashdb 2> into <destination hashdb>.
Hashes match when hash values match, even if their associated
source repository name and filename do not match.

.IP "subtract <source hashdb 1> <source hashdb 2> <destination hashdb>"
Copy hashes in <souce hashdb 1> and not in <source hashdb 2> into
<destination hashdb>.
Hashes and their sources must match.

.IP "subtract_hash <source hashdb 1> <source hashdb 2> <destination hashdb>"
Copy hashes in <souce hashdb 1> and not in <source hashdb 2> into
<destination hashdb>.
Hashes match when hash values match, even if their associated
source repository name and filename do not match.

.IP "deduplicate <source hashdb> <destination hashdb>"
Copy hall hashes in <source hashdb> to <destination hashdb> except
for hashes defined multiple times.

.IP "scan <path_or_socket> <DFXML file>"
Scans the <path_or_socket> for hashes that match hashes in the <DFXML file>
and prints out match count for matches.

.IP "scan_hash <path_or_socket> <hash value>"
Scans the <path_or_socket> for hashes that match the specified <hash value>.

.IP "server <hashdb> <port number>"
Starts a query server service for <hashdb> at <port number> for
servicing hashdb queries (currently not available).

.IP "size <hashdb>"
Prints out size information about the given <hashdb> database.

.IP "sources <hashdb>"
Print source information indicating where the hashes in the <hashdb> came from.

.IP "histogram <hashdb>"
Print the histogram of hashes for the given <hashdb> database.

.IP "duplicates <hashdb> <number>"
Print the hashes in the given <hashdb> database that are sourced
the given <number> of times.

.IP "hash_table <hashdb>"
Print the hashes and offsets from the given <hashdb> database for the
<repository name> and <filename> source requested.

.IP "expand_identified_blocks <hashdb> <identified blocks file>"
Print source information for each hash in <identified blocks file>
by referencing source information in <hashdb>.  Source information
includes repository name, filename, and file offset.

.IP "explain_identified_blocks [-m <number>] <hashdb> <identified_blocks.txt>"
Print source information from the <hashdb> database for hashes in the
<identified_blocks.txt> file that are not repeated more than the <number>
of times.

.IP "rebuild_bloom [options] <hashdb>"
Rebuild the bloom filter in the <hashdb> hash database.

.IP "upgrade <hashdb>"
Make <hashdb> created by v1.0.0 compatible with hashdb v1.1.0+.

.IP "add_random [-r <repository name>] <hashdb> <count>"
Add <count> random hashes into hash database <hashdb>, generating statistics.

.IP "scan_random <hashdb>"
Scan for random hashes in hash database <hashdb>, generating statistics.

.SH HISTORY
.BR "hashdb" 
was released into the public domain by Bruce Allen in 2013.
.SH AUTHOR
Bruce Allen <bdallen@nps.edu>
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Report bugs to bdallen@nps.edu
.SH COPYRIGHT
.BR "hashdb" 
code is provided with the following notice:
The software provided here is released by the Naval Postgraduate School,
an agency of the U.S. Department of Navy. The software bears no warranty,
either expressed or implied. NPS does not assume legal liability nor
responsibility for a User's use of the software or the results of such use.

Please note that within the United States, copyright protection,
under Section 105 of the United States Code, Title 17, is not available
for any work of the United States Government and/or for any works
created by United States Government employees. 

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR "hashdb" 
wiki at https://github.com/simsong/hashdb/wiki.

